



14.Child-centred education was advocated by which of the following thinkers?
(a) Charles Darwin
(b) B.F. Skinner
(c) John Dewey
(d) Eric Erickson

15. Knowledge of.............. will be most significant for a teacher dealing with
a class comprising students of mixed age groups?
(a) socio-economic background
(b) cultural background
(c) developmental stages.
(d) occupation of their parents 

16. Gifted students?
(a) perform exceptionally well in any field important to human beings
(b) are generally physically weak and not good at social interaction
(c) generally do not like their teachers
(d) realize their full potential without any help.

17.Systematic presentation of concepts. may be related with which of the following principles of developmer.
(a) Development proceeds from heteronomy to autonomy
(b) Students develop at different rates 
(c) Development is relatively orderly
(d) Development leads to growth

18.Classrooms after the implementation 23. Assessment learning influences learn-
of RTE Act are?
(a) gender-wise more homogeneous
(b) age-wise more homogeneous
(c) age-wise more heterogeneous
(d) unaffected, as RTE does not affect the average age of a class in a school.

19. Acceleration with reference to gifted children means
(a) accelerating the process of assessment
(b) accelerating the transaction of scholastic activities
(c) speeding up the transaction of co- scholastic activities
(d) promoting such students to next higher grade by skipping the present grade

20.While teaching single parent child, a teacher should
(a) overlook this fact and treat such a child at par with other children
(b) treat such a child differently
(c) assign lesser home assignments to such a child
(d) provide stable and consistent environment.

21.Which of the following is the most appropriate activity for gifted students?
(a) Write an original play on given concepts
(b) Solve exercises given at the end of five-chapters at one go
(c) Teach their class on Teachers Day 
(d) Write a report on school match recently held.

22.Which one of the following could he an end stage of a possessing bodily- kinesthetic intelligence?
(a) Poet
(b) Orator
(c) Political leader
(d) Surgeo 

23.Assesment learning influences learning reinforcing the between assess- ment instruction?
 (a) of; variance
 (b) for; connections
 (c) for; difference 
 (d) of; difference

24.Ideal 'Waiting Time' for getting response from's should be proportional to
(a) relevance of the question in the real life
(b) time allotted to specific topic in the curriculum
(c) difficulty level of the question
(d) time taken by the students for answering quest; m* from previous lessons.

25. For an intrinsically motivated student?
(a) there is no need of formal education
(b) rewards are not at all required
(c) external rewards are not enough to keep him/her motivated
(d) the level of motivation is lower than an extrinsically motivated student.

26. Suppose you are the Chairperson of a Board of School Education, how would you plan to improve the overall quality of education in the schools under your jurisdiction? This type of question is an example of..
(a) lower order divergent
(b) higher order convergent
(c) higher order divergent
(d) lower order convergent

27. In Science practical, boys generally take control of apparatus and ask girls to record data or wash utensils. This tendency reflects that?
(a) boys can handle equipments more efficiently as they are naturally endowed for doing such things
(b) girls being delicate tasks prefer such less energy consuming
(c) girls are excellent observers and record data flawlessly
(d) stereotyping of masculine and feminine roles takes place in schools also.

28.The word 'Comprehensive' in the scheme of Continuous and Comprehen- sive Evaluation is supported by the following except?
(a) L.L. Thurstone's theory of primary mental abilities
(b) Theory of multiple intelligence
(c) Theory of information processing
(d) J.P. Guilford's theory of structure of-intellect.

29.How teachers and students..........gender in the classroom, it........ the learning environment.
(a) define; vitiate the
(b) interpret; does not affect 
(c) construct; impacts
(d) adapt, perturbs

30. Achievement motivation is?
(a) tendency, to act impulsively
(b) the tendency to persist at challenging tasks
(c) the tendency to avoid failure
(d) willingness to accept success and failure equally.


